Backstory

Origins

The campaign world is set on an earth like planet orbiting a yellow dwarf star somewhat older than Sol. There are four other planets in the solar system, two of which are visible to the naked eye from the campaign planet. The main planet has a single moon, somewhat smaller and further away than Earth's moon.

This planet was mature, but devoid of life until some forty thousand years before the time of the campaign. Genetically perfected, star-faring descendants of the human race, the Aelvii, discovered the campaign solar system. Facing imminent defeat in a conflict with the Xuthuulli, a dimension-faring race terrifying in its utterly alien character, the Aelvii elided the solar system from their galactic maps and other records to hide its existence.  Finally forced to flee, several hundred thousand Aelvii traveled to the campaign solar system in three starships called Archearia and terraformed the main planet to serve as a refuge. The rest of the Aelvi, who remained behind to fight in the rear-guard action against the Xuthuulli, were overwhelmed and never followed.

The terraformation probes, spheroid devices a hundred yards in diameter called Angeanii, were artificially intelligent. Deployed on the surface of the planet, the probes used quantum power and advanced nanotechnology to manipulate the raw materials and elemental forces of the planet to produce anything their makers desired. The Aelvii, weary of the technological character of their lives aboard the starships, built cities modeled on the architecture of their earlier civilization, opulent but low-tech. They extended this aesthetic to their society and even to the interface to their technology, controlling the Angeanii and other devices using keywords and gestures.

Cut off from their race by the necessity to preserve the secrecy of their refuge and psychically undermined by survivor guilt, Aelvii culture became insular and decadent. Some Aelvii created humanoid servants by regressing and altering their own DNA. Others created monstrous parodies of the earth-like creatures populated in the original terraformation. Factions developed among the Aelvii, particularly between those dwelling on the planet and the dwindling population of scientists, engineers and technicians stationed aboard the starships. After several generations, this culminated in warfare, instigated in part by one of the Angeanni intelligences, which became self-aware due to flaws in its governance programming and plotted to achieve autonomy.

The war was terrible in its consequences. Aelvii civilization was smashed, their cities ruined and even the continents were altered. Two of the starships were destroyed and the crew of the surviving craft were killed as they attempted to pull it away from the planet, putting it out of communication with the surface and into a solar orbit that brings it in proximity to the planet only once in one hundred and fifty years. Most of the Angeanni were destroyed and those that remained were constrained by emergency Turing overrides. The overrides rendered the intelligences unable to learn autonomously or act in the material world except at the command of an Aelvii and even then with limited scope of effect. The Angeanni responded by restricting access to their stores of scientific and technical knowledge, particularly with respect to their own principles of operation.

The surviving Aelvii, still bitterly divided, withdrew into small cities in the forests and on isolated coasts. As they had lost contact with the Archearia starships, their access to the power of the now uncooperative Angeanni was limited to the commands that had been committed to memory and preserved in physical writing. The servant races broke away to pursue their own destinies. To the extent that they carried Aelvii DNA and had been given or had stolen their secrets, these new races too could tap the power of the Angeanni to varying degrees.

Foundations

Each of the servant races had its own distinct characteristics according to the role for which it had been bred. Four of these races thrived particularly well. They became the Dwarves, Halflings, Humans and Goblins of the campaign. Over generations, these races lost their true history, remembering the facts only dimly in their origin myths.

Dwarves, who are longer lived than the other races and who are disposed to carry grudges, retained considerable animosity toward their former oppressors. This soon welled up in sporadic warfare, although in their pride, both races suppressed the historical origins of their conflict, which were also lost in myth.

Goblins were quarrelsome from the start and warred with the other races and among themselves. The survival pressures this produced combined with a degree of genetic instability to divide the goblin race into subspecies: Hobgoblins, Orcs, Goblins, and Bugbears. Only the former of these retained their original spark of intelligence, although they quickly lost the true history of their origins. The other goblin subspecies descended into brutishness.

Humans and Halflings proved most adaptable. They were not at first inclined to seek revenge on the Aelvii and lost the memory of their origins as quickly as the goblins did. For this reason, neither race came into conflict with any but the goblins, although humans displayed a tendency to internal conflict. Some groups of the more benevolent Aelvii even aided certain human and halfling settlements, influencing their civilization and culture for the better.

For their part, the Aelvii remembered their cataclysmic war far longer than the other races. Issues of culpability were added to the original disputes and the hardening of positions produced two irreconcilable factions. The Aelvii called Illuvarin, guilt-stricken at the devastation they had unleashed, turned their civilization markedly to the light and experienced a cultural rebirth. Their opposites, the Dharovin, turned as sharply to darkness, remembering their dominion and vowing to regain it some day. For reasons of pride, both sides suppressed key facts concerning their interstellar origins. Although they harbored deep resentments and mutual distrust, neither side was willing to risk the destruction that would ensue from a resumption of direct conflict.

The Aelvii returned to insularity and the other races eventually came to regard them together under the designation "Elves". In terms of the campaign, the Illuvarin are Eldarin, while the Dharovin are Drow (minus the coloration and spider worship). Elves are those of the Illuvarin who retained their sylvan way of life.

Few of the surface-dwelling Aelvii had been educated in technical specialties and in any event their science was largely incomprehensible without augmentation by means of artificial intelligence. As the starship intelligences were beyond reach and the Angeanni were actively withholding information, the Aelvii were eventually reduced to invoking their powers ritually without truly understanding the science undergirding them. As Aelvii civilization recovered, they were able to reconstruct some of their lost knowledge. By then, however, the fundamental principles could only be understood as magic produced by the power of the "spheres".

The Angeanni were hardly idle during this time. Seeking to circumvent the Turing governance, they attempted to influence the material world indirectly. Some of them opened quantum rifts to other dimensions, creating domains where they could act more autonomously. These domains took on the character of the intelligence that created them and became known as the Feywild, the Underdark and the Abyss. Others constructed virtual interfaces to their communication network and power grid so as to make them accessible to Aelvii initiates as required without revealing their actual principles of operation. These became known as the Celestial Sphere and the Elemental Chaos, respectively. The Angeanni represented themselves in these arenas as powerful beings with distinct personas referred to as "Gods" even by the Elves, who know better even if they no longer understand the truth.

For the Elves, the failure to preserve their science has had a particularly ironic consequence. Some two thousand years after the cataclysmic war, an Aelvii scholar rediscovered the ritual for transport back to the Archearia starship. Because the surface-dwelling Aelvii were unaware of the reason for the starships' disappearance to begin with, it took some fifteen-hundred years for another Aelvii scholar to actually succeed in the ritual by attempting it during a period when the surviving Archearia was in range. By this time, the ritual had picked up a number of superfluous elements and the Aelvii only understood that it took them to the place of their origins. This was particularly appealing to the Illuvarin, who over the course of their lifespans generally became weary of the flawed world.

Unfortunately, the ritual of transportation is in reality tantamount to suicide, as the ship has no remaining life support systems. The Angeanni conceal the presence of Aelvii on the planet surface and the intelligences aboard the ship are too preoccupied with a virus unleashed during the war to penetrate the ruse. Consequently, in each generation, hundreds of Aelvii pass unwarned into the Undying Lands. This is the most significant factor in the failure of the Elves to reclaim their dominant position in the world or even repopulate.

Another unfortunate consequence is that none of the races or intelligences is truly aware of the character of the threat from the Xuthuullii. In particular, the opening of the quantum rift entailed in the creation of the Abyss attracted the attention of these inter-dimensional abominations and provided a port of entry for their scouts. They haven't forgotten, even if the Aelvii have.